DANS BagIt Profile v1.1.0
=========================

Introduction
------------

### Version

* Document version: 1.1.0
* Publication date: 2024-04-08

### Status

* ARCHIVED

<font color="red">**THIS VERSION OF THE PROFILE IS NO LONGER IN USE.**</font>


### Changes

#### Changed from version 1.0.0 to 1.1.0

* Rule 1.2.2 changed to no longer require the `Created` element in `bag-info.txt`, but still allow it for backwards compatibility.

### Scope

This document specifies what constitutes an acceptable DANS bag. This includes all the requirements for a bag to be successfully processed by the ingest
workflow.

Version 1.0.0 covers the requirements used by the DANS Data Stations and the Vault as a Service.

(DANS internal note: DANS BagIt Profile is also being used in the migration from EASY to the Data Stations. Some rules are modified for migration deposits. See
[Migration Supplement](../1.0.0-migration-supplement.md).)

### Overview and conventions

#### Keywords

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "
OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119]{:target=_blank}.

The keyword "SHOULD" is also used to specify requirements that are impossible or impractical to check by the archival
organization (i.e. DANS). The client should do its best to meet these requirements, but not rely on their being
validated by the archival organization.

#### Subdivisions

The requirements are subdivided into the following sections:

* BagIt-related requirements - requirements that refer back to the BagIt specifications
* Structural requirements - requirements regarding the directories and files in the bag
* Metadata requirements - requirements regarding the metadata files included in the bag
* Data Station context requirements - requirements regarding the Data Station where the dataset is to be created or
  modified; these do not apply to the Vault as a Service
* Vault as a Service context requirements - requirements that are only applicable to the Vault as a Service and not to the Data Stations 

The sections are numbered and may have numbered subsections. The requirements themselves are stated as numbered rules.
Rules may have parts that are labeled with letters: (a), (b), (c), etc. To uniquely identify a specific rule, use the
notation

```
<section-nr>[.<subsection-nr>].<rule-nr> [(<letter>)]
```

Example: `2.3.4 (e)` means part **e** of the fourth rule in subsection 3 of section 2.

#### XML namespaces

When referring to XML element or attribute names or attribute values that have a prefix (such as `dcterms:identifier`)
an element in a certain namespace is intended. The table below lists the mapping from prefix to namespace. In the actual
document, the namespace may be bound to a different prefix, or be the default namespace.

| Prefix    | Namespace URI                                             | Namespace documentation                                                |
|-----------|-----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `dc`      | `http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/`                        | [DC]{:target=_blank}                                                   |     
| `dcterms` | `http://purl.org/dc/terms/`                               | [DCTERMS]{:target=_blank}                                              |    
| `dcx-dai` | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/dcx/dai/`               | [DANS DCTERMS extension: Digital Author Identifier]{:target=_blank}    | 
| `dcx-gml` | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/dcx/gml/`               | [DANS DCTERMS extension: Geography Markup Language]{:target=_blank}    |
| `ddm`     | `http://schemas.dans.knaw.nl/dataset/ddm-v2/`             | [DANS dataset metadata schema]{:target=_blank}                         |
| `files`   | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/bag/metadata/files/`    | [DANS bag file metadata schema]{:target=_blank}                        |
| `gml`     | `http://www.opengis.net/gml`                              | [GML 3.1.1 Simplified Features profile Levels 0 and 1]{:target=_blank} |
| `id-type` | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/vocab/identifier-type/` | [DANS controlled list of dcterms:identifier types]{:target=_blank}     |
| `xsi`     | `http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance`               | [XML Schema]{:target=_blank}                                           |

#### Names

Exact names are specified in `code` style. The capitalization of those names must be exactly as specified, unless it is
explicitly stated that the name is case-insensitive. If the name is a file path it is relative to the bag base
directory.


Glossary
--------
This section defines a number of terms that may be useful when discussing this specification. Several of these terms are
used in the [Requirements](#requirements) section of this document. Where terms are used in the definitions of other
terms, they are printed in *italics*.

* **bag**: a data package conforming to the [BagIt]{:target=_blank} specifications.

* **bag-ID**: a [urn:uuid]{:target=_blank} given to every deposit upon delivery to DANS. The bag-ID of the first version
  of a dataset is also known as the *sword token*.

* **(version N) DANS-bag**: a *bag* that also conforms to (version N) of the DANS BagIt Profile specifications.

* **DANS Data Station**: the publishing and archiving service of DANS for datasets

* **Vault as a Service**: the service that allows customers to store datasets in the DANS Data Vault, without publishing
  them in a Data Station

* **DANS SWORD Service**: the DANS implementation of the [SWORDv2]{:target=_blank} protocol

* **dataset**: an information package containing data and metadata published in a *DANS Data Station*. A dataset may
  have multiple versions.

* **deposit**: a package containing data and metadata sent to DANS by the *depositor* to create a new dataset or dataset
  version.

* **depositor**: the agent sending data to DANS for publishing in a *DANS Data Station*. This term corresponds to the
  Producer in the [OAIS Reference Model]{:target=_blank}.

* **deaccessioned version**: a dataset that is present in a *DANS Data Station*, but no longer disseminated. To the
  external user the dataset version appears to be deleted, only a tombstone remains.

* **update-deposit**: a *deposit* that is intended to create a new version of an existing *dataset*.

* **version-bag-ID**: a *bag-ID* that references a *version* of a *dataset*. If the *dataset* consists of several
  *versions*, the DOI resolves to the most recent of those *version*<hidden>s. All versions of one dataset have the
  same *sword token*.

* **sword token**: a [urn:uuid]{:target=_blank} assigned to first version bags upon submission through the
  *DANS SWORD Service*. This UUID is used when depositing an *update-deposit* and to identify all versions of one
  dataset.

Requirements
------------

### 1 BagIt related

#### 1.1 Validity

1. The bag MUST be valid according to the [BagIt]{:target=_blank} specifications v1.0 (RFC 8493).

#### 1.2 `bag-info.txt`

1. The bag MUST contain a `bag-info.txt` file.

2. The `bag-info.txt` file MAY contain one or more elements called `Created`. This element, when present, is ignored. The only reason to allow it is for 
   backwards compatibility with v1.0.0 of the DANS BagIt Profile.

3. (a) The `bag-info.txt` file MAY contain at most one element called `Is-Version-Of` (b) with a
   [urn:uuid]{:target=_blank}-value. See rules 4.1 and 5.1 for the context requirements if `Is-Version-Of` is provided.

4. (a) The `bag-info.txt` file MAY contain at most one element called `Has-Organizational-Identifier`. (b) If this `Has-Organizational-Identifier` is given,
   at most one `Has-Organizational-Identifier-Version` MAY be present, containing a version number. (c) If `Has-Organizational-Identifier` is present
   then its value MUST start with one of the approved prefixes. Each client will be assigned a unique prefix to use for this purpose.

#### 1.3 Manifests

1. If the bag has only one payload manifest it MUST NOT use the MD5 algorithm. However, it MAY have an MD5 payload manifest in addition to other payload
   manifests.

### 2 Structural requirements

1. The bag MUST have a tag-directory called `metadata` directly under the bag base directory.

2. The `metadata` directory MUST contain the files: (a) `metadata/dataset.xml` and (b) `metadata/files.xml`.

3. The `metadata` directory MUST NOT contain any other files or directories.

4. A DANS bag MAY contain a file `original-filepaths.txt` in the root of the bag in UTF-8 encoding. For the content requirements
   and purpose of this file, if it exists, see Section 3.3.

### 3 Metadata requirements

#### 3.1 `metadata/dataset.xml`

1. The file `metadata/dataset.xml` MUST adhere to [DANS dataset metadata schema]{:target=_blank}.

2. The file `metadata/dataset.xml` MUST have at least one `dcterms:license` element as a child of the `dcmiMetadata` element. Exactly one of these elements MUST
   have the attribute `xsi:type="dcterms:URI"` and have a URI as element text. (See also rule 4.2.)

3. Any `dcx-dai:<scheme>` elements (i.e. (a) DAI, (b) ISNI or (c) ORCID) MUST contain an identifier that complies with the syntaxis for the selected identifier
   scheme URI.

4. Any `gml:posList` elements nested in `gml:Polygon` elements:

    * MUST have an even number of values.
    * MUST have at least three different pairs of values, each of which describes one point.
    * MUST start and end with the same pair of values.

5. If a `gml:MultiSurface` is used, all nested `gml:Polygon` MUST have the same `srsName` attribute.

6. Any `gml:Point/gml:pos` (pos nested in a Point), `gml:lowerCorner` and `gml:upperCorner` elements MUST have at least two values. These values MUST be
   numeric. In case the `srsName` specifies the [RD]{:target=_blank} scheme the values MUST be within the valid range.

7. Any `dc:identifier` or `dcterms:identifier` element with attribute `xsi:type="id-type:ARCHIS-ZAAK-IDENTIFICATIE` MUST have a value of 10 or fewer characters.

8. All URLs used in `metadata/dataset.xml` MUST be valid URLs with protocol `http` or `https`.

9. The file `metadata/dataset.xml` MUST have one or more rights holders, each in a `<dcterms:rightsHolder>` element as a child of the `dcmiMetadata` element.

10. `dcx-dai:author` and `dcx-dai:organization` elements MUST NOT have the role `RightsHolder`.

#### 3.2 `metadata/files.xml`

1. The file `metadata/files.xml` MUST adhere to [DANS bag file metadata schema]{:target=_blank}.

2. Each `file` element's `filepath` attribute MUST contain the bag local path to the payload file described. When an `original-filepaths.txt` exists, rule 3.3.1
   applies. Directories and non-payload files MUST NOT be described by a `file` element.

3. There MUST NOT be more than one `file` element corresponding to a payload file and every payload file MUST be described by a `file` element.

#### 3.3 `original-filepaths.txt`

1. The purpose of `original-filepaths.txt` is to provide a complete mapping from renamed files back to their original full path (including filename). It MUST be
   a text file encoded with UTF-8.
2. The lines of `original-filepaths.txt` MUST be formatted as `<physical-bag-relative-path><whitespace><original-bag-relative-path>`, where

    * `<physical-bag-relative-path>` MUST NOT contain whitespace.
    * `<physical-bag-relative-path>` MUST correspond one-to-one to an existing payload file.
    * `<original-bag-relative-path>` MUST correspond one-to-one to a `filepath` attribute in the `file` elements in
      the `files.xml`.

### 4 Data Station context requirements

1. If `bag-info.txt` contains the element `Is-Version-Of` there MUST be a dataset in the target Data Station with the following properties: (a) it has
   a `dansSwordToken` with the same value as `Is-Version-Of` (b) it has a `dansOtherId` with the same value as `bag-info.txt`'s
   `Has-Organizational-Identifier` (or both are absent).

2. The `metadata/dataset.xml` element `dcmiMetadata/dcterms:license` with attribute `xsi:type="dcterms:URI"` (see 3.1.2)  must be one of the licenses supported
   by the target Data Station.

3. The date in `metadata/dataset.xml` element `profile/available` MUST NOT be further in the future than the limit set on embargoes in the target Data Station.

4. The bag MUST NOT contain a payload file `data/original-metadata.zip`.

### 5 Vault as a Service context requirements

1. If `bag-info.txt` contains the element `Is-Version-Of` there MUST be a dataset in the Vault that has a `dansSwordToken` with the same value as
   `Is-Version-Of`.
   
2. (a) The file `metadata/dataset.xml` MAY contain at most one `dcterms:identifier` element with an attribute `xsi:type="id-type:DOI"`.
   (b) If present, the text of this element MUST be a syntactically valid [DOI]{:target=_blank} identifier which SHOULD be resolvable.

References
----------

* [BagIt]{:target=_blank} - packaging format on which the DANS Data Station ingest process is based
* [DANS bag file metadata schema]{:target=_blank} - schema for content file specific metadata
* [DANS dataset metadata schema]{:target=_blank} - schema for dataset level metadata
* [DANS controlled list of dcterms:identifier types]{:target=_blank} - list of valid values for `xsi:id-type`
* [DANS DCTERMS extension: Digital Author Identifier]{:target=_blank} - extensions to accommodate Digital Author
  Identifiers
* [DANS DCTERMS extension: Geography Markup Language]{:target=_blank} - extensions to accommodate Geography Markup
  Language
* [DC]{:target=_blank} - Dublin Core metadata elements
* [DCTERMS]{:target=_blank} - metadata schema from which elements are used in several DANS metadata schemas
* [DOI]{:target=_blank} - Digital Object Identifier
* [GML 3.1.1 Simplified Features profile Levels 0 and 1]{:target=_blank} - Profile of Geography Mark-up Language
* [ISO 8601]{:target=_blank} - standard for formatting dates and times
* [Media Type]{:target=_blank} - identifiers for file formats
* [OAIS Reference Model]{:target=_blank} - reference model for long term preservation archives
* [RFC 2119]{:target=_blank} - specification for use of requirement level keywords
* [RD]{:target=_blank} - *Stelsel van de Rijksdriehoeksmeting*, a scheme for geographical locations
* [urn:uuid]{:target=_blank} - URN scheme for [UUID]{:target=_blank}s
* [urn:NBN]{:target=_blank} - URN scheme for National Bibliographic Numbers
* [UUID]{:target=_blank} - universally unique identifiers
* [XML Schema]{:target=_blank} - constraint language for specifying types of XML documents

[BagIt]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8493

[DANS bag file metadata schema]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DANS-KNAW/dans-schema/master/lib/src/main/resources/bag/metadata/files/files.xsd

[DANS dataset metadata schema]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DANS-KNAW/dans-schema/master/lib/src/main/resources/md/ddm/v2/ddm.xsd

[DANS DCTERMS extension: Digital Author Identifier]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DANS-KNAW/dans-schema/master/lib/src/main/resources/dcx/dcx-dai.xsd

[DANS DCTERMS extension: Geography Markup Language]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DANS-KNAW/dans-schema/master/lib/src/main/resources/dcx/dcx-gml.xsd

[DC]: http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/

[DCTERMS]: http://www.dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/

[Digital Author Identifier]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_Author_Identifier

[DOI]: https://www.doi.org/

[GML 3.1.1 Simplified Features profile Levels 0 and 1]: https://schemas.opengis.net/gml/3.1.1/profiles/gmlsfProfile/1.0.0/gmlsf.xsd

[ISO 8601]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601

[Media Type]: https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml

[OAIS Reference Model]: https://public.ccsds.org/pubs/650x0m2.pdf

[RD]: https://www.opengis.net/def/crs/EPSG/0/28992

[RFC 2119]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt

[SWORDv2]: https://sword.cottagelabs.com/previous-versions-of-sword/sword-v2/sword-v2-specifications/

[urn:uuid]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier

[urn:NBN]: https://www.kb.nl/organisatie/onderzoek-expertise/informatie-infrastructuur-diensten-voor-bibliotheken/registration-agency-nbn

[UUID]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier

[XML Schema]: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-1/

[DANS controlled list of dcterms:identifier types]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DANS-KNAW/dans-schema/master/lib/src/main/resources/vocab/identifier-type.xsd