DANS BagIt Profile v0
=====================

Table of contents
-----------------

- [Introduction](#introduction)
  * [Version](#version)
  * [Status](#status)
  * [Scope](#scope)
  * [Overview and conventions](#overview-and-conventions)
    + [Key words](#key-words)
    + [Subdivisions](#subdivisions)
    + [SIP vs AIP](#sip-vs-aip)
    + [Stand-alone vs in-sequence-context validation](#stand-alone-vs-in-sequence-context-validation)
    + [XML namespaces](#xml-namespaces)
    + [Name spelling](#name-spelling)
- [Glossary](#glossary)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
  * [1 BagIt related](#1-bagit-related)
    + [1.1 Validity](#11-validity)
    + [1.2 `bag-info.txt`](#12-bag-infotxt)
    + [1.3 Manifests](#13-manifests)
  * [2 Structural requirements](#2-structural-requirements)
  * [3 Metadata requirements](#3-metadata-requirements)
    + [3.1 `metadata/dataset.xml`](#31-metadatadatasetxml)
    + [3.2 `metadata/files.xml`](#32-metadatafilesxml)
    + [3.3 `metadata/depositor-info/agreements.xml`](#33-metadatadepositor-infoagreementsxml)
    + [3.4 `metadata/depositor-info/message-from-depositor.txt`](#34-metadatadepositor-infomessage-from-depositortxt)
    + [3.5 `metadata/depositor-info/depositor-agreement`](#35-metadatadepositor-infodepositor-agreement)
    + [3.6 `metadata/amd.xml`](#36-metadataamdxml)
    + [3.7 `metadata/emd.xml`](#37-metadataemdxml)
  * [4 Bag sequence requirements](#4-bag-sequence-requirements)
- [References](#references)


Introduction
------------

### Version
* Document version: 0.0.0
* Publication date: 2019-05-02

### Status
Status of this document is PUBLISHED.

### Scope
This document specifies what constitutes an acceptable DANS bag. This includes all the requirements for a bag to be successfully processed by 
the ingest workflow. What is acceptable as a [SIP] is sometimes not exactly the same as what is acceptable as an [AIP]. Where these are different, 
this is documented.

### Overview and conventions
#### Key words
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document 
are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119].

The key word "SHOULD" is also used to specify requirements that are impossible or impractical to check by the archival organization (i.e. DANS). 
The client should do its best to meet these requirements, but not rely on their being validated by the archival organization.

#### Subdivisions
The requirements are subdivided into the following sections:

* BagIt-related requirements - requirements that refer back to the BagIt specifications
* Structural requirements - requirements regarding the directories and files in the bag
* Metadata requirements - requirements regarding the metadata files included in the bag
* Bag sequence requirements - requirements regarding the metadata that records how a sequence of bags can represent the history of a dataset

The sections are numbered and may have numbered subsections. The requirements themselves are stated as
numbered rules. To uniquely identify a specific rule, use the notation `<section-nr>[.<subsection-nr>].<rule-nr>`,
e.g., 2.3.4 for the fourth rule in subsection 3 of section 2.

#### SIP vs AIP
Rules that only apply to SIPs or AIPs are annotated with the comments "**(SIP)**" and "**(AIP)**"
respectively. All other rules apply to SIP and AIP alike.

#### Stand-alone vs in-sequence-context validation
There are two levels of validation:

* **stand-alone**: this includes the validation steps that can be performed without taking into account any data outside the bag, in particular
  the bag store that the bag is (to be) stored in. This means that only the rules in sections 1-3 are checked in this level.
* **in-sequence-context**: this includes all the checks done in stand-alone validation plus checks that involve the bag-sequence
  that the bag is (to be) part of. This means all the rules in this document are checked.

Stand-alone validation can be useful when you do not have access to the target bag store. Another reason to do only stand-alone validation may be
that the overhead of doing calls to the bag store over the network is too high.

#### XML namespaces
When referring to XML element or attribute names or attribute values that have a prefix (such as `dcterms:identifier`)
an element in a certain namespace is intended. The table below lists the mapping from prefix to namespace.
In the actual document, the namespace may be bound to a different prefix, or be the default namespace.

Prefix          |  Namespace URI                                            | Namespace documentation
----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------
`am`            | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/bag/metadata/agreements/` | [DANS deposit agreement metadata]
`amd`           | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/easy/dataset-administrative-metadata/` | [EASY administrative metadata schema]
`dc`            | `http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/`                        | [DC]
`dcterms`       | `http://purl.org/dc/terms/`                               | [DCTERMS]
`dcx-dai`       | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/dcx/dai/`               | [DANS DCTERMS extension: Digital Author Identifier]
`dcx-gml`       | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/dcx/gml/`               | [DANS DCTERMS extension: Geography Markup Language]
`ddm`           | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/md/ddm/`                | [DANS dataset metadata schema]
`emd`           | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/easy/easymetadata/`             | [EASY metadata schema]
`files`         | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/bag/metadata/files/`    | [DANS bag file metadata schema]
`gml`           | `http://www.opengis.net/gml`                              | [GML 3.1.1 Simplified Features profile Levels 0 and 1]
`id-type`       | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/vocab/identifier-type/` | DANS controlled list of `dcterms:identifier` types
`wfs`           | `http://easy.dans.knaw.nl/easy/workflow/`                 | [EASY administrative workflow metadata schema]
`xsi`           | `http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance`               | [XML Schema]

#### Name spelling
Exact names are specified in `code` style. The capitalization of those names must be exactly as
specified, unless it is explicitly stated that the name is case insensitive. If the name is a file path
it is relative to the bag base directory.


Glossary
--------
This section defines a number of terms that may be useful when discussing this specification. Several of these terms
are used in the [Requirements](#requirements) section of this document. Where terms are used in the definitions of
other terms, they are printed in *italics*.

* **AIP**: Archival Information Package, as defined in the [OAIS Reference Model]. See also [AIP].

* **bag**: a data package conforming to the [BagIt] specifications.

* **bag-sequence**: a sequence of *DANS-bag*s, that together represent the history of an archived *dataset* in
  the *DANS Data Vault*.

* **bag-store**: storage for immutable *bag*s. All DANS *bag-stores* combined are called the *DANS Data Vault*.

* **(version N) DANS-bag**: a *bag* that also conforms to (version N) of the DANS BagIt Profile specifications.

* **base-revision**: the *revision* that is used to reference a complete *bag-sequence*. Usually, this is the oldest
  *revision*.

* **corresponding bag-files**: files in different *bag*s of the same *bag-sequence*, that are identical or have the
  exact same path (including the file name) within the bag.

* **DANS Data Vault**: the *bag-store*s of DANS combined.

* **dataset**: the DANS implementation of the Information Package concept from the [OAIS Reference Model]. An archived
  dataset corresponds to an *AIP*. A dataset is represented in the *DANS Data Vault* as a *bag-sequence*.

* **deposit**: a dataset as it is delivered to DANS by the *depositor*, i.e. the *SIP*, as it is being
  transformed into an *AIP*.

* **depositor**: the agent sending data to DANS for archiving in the *DANS Data Vault*. This term corresponds
  to the Producer in the [OAIS Reference Model].

* **inactive bag**: a bag that is present in the *DANS Data Vault*, but no longer disseminated. To the external user the
  bag appears to be deleted. A bag that is not inactive is active.

* **revision**: a *DANS-bag* that has been successfully archived in the *DANS Data Vault*. It has a [UUID] identifier and
  a timestamp that records its place in the *bag-sequence*.

* **sequence-DOI**: a *DOI* that references *a bag-sequence*. It resolves to the most recent revision of that *dataset*.

* **SIP**: Submission Information Package, as defined in the [OAIS Reference Model]. See also [SIP].

* **update-deposit**: a *deposit* that is intended to be added as a revision of an existing, archived *dataset*.

* **version**: a *revision* that has its own *version-DOI*. A *version* of an archived *dataset* may be updated by new
  *revision*s that keep the same *version-DOI*.

* **version-DOI**: a *DOI* that references a *version* of an archived *dataset*. If the *version* consists of several
  *revisions*, the version-DOI resolves to the most recent of those *revision*s.


Requirements
------------
### 1 BagIt related

#### 1.1 Validity
1. **(SIP)** The bag MUST be `VALID` according to the BagIt 0.97 specifications.

#### 1.2 `bag-info.txt`
1. The bag MUST contain a `bag-info.txt` file.

2. (a) The `bag-info.txt` file MAY contain at most one element called `BagIt-Profile-Version`. (b) If present, its
   value MUST be `0`.

3. (a) The `bag-info.txt` file MAY contain at most one element called `BagIt-Profile-URI`. (b) If present, its
   value MUST be `doi:10.17026/dans-z52-ybfe`.

4. (a) The `bag-info.txt` file MUST contain exactly one element called `Created`. (b) It MUST have a timestamp value
   in [ISO 8601] format, including the time zone and a millisecond precision time part. This
   SHOULD reflect the time at which the dataset, deposited through this bag, was created or
   changed to the updated version which is being sent.

5. The `bag-info.txt` file MAY contain at most one element called `Is-Version-Of` with a [urn:uuid]-value.

6. The `bag-info.txt` file (a) MUST **(AIP)** or (b) MUST NOT **(SIP)** contain an entry called `EASY-User-Account`. If present,
   its value SHOULD be the user name of an existing EASY user account.

#### 1.3 Manifests
1. (a) The bag MUST have a SHA-1 payload manifest. (b) It MUST have entries for all the payload files.

2. The bag MAY have other payload manifests and tag manifests.

### 2 Structural requirements
1. The bag MUST have a tag-directory called `metadata` (one word, lowercase letters) directly under
   the bag base directory.

2. The `metadata` directory MUST contain the files: (a) `metadata/dataset.xml` and (b) `metadata/files.xml`. It MAY contain the files `metadata/amd.xml` and `metadata/emd.xml`.

3. The `metadata` directory MAY contain a directory `depositor-info` in which the following files MAY be present `metadata/depositor-info/agreements.xml` with information about agreements between the depositor and DANS. 
   Among other things it specifies the existence of personal data within the files in `data`.
   Other files that MAY be present are: 
     * either `metadata/depositor-info/depositor-agreement.pdf` or `metadata/depositor-info/depositor-agreement.txt`;
     * `metadata/depositor-info/message-from-depositor.txt`.

4. **(SIP)** The `metadata` directory MAY contain a file called `metadata/depositor-info/message-from-depositor.txt`.

5. The `metadata` directory MUST NOT contain any other files or directories.

### 3 Metadata requirements

#### 3.1 `metadata/dataset.xml`
1. The file `metadata/dataset.xml` MUST adhere to [DANS dataset metadata schema].

2. The file `metadata/dataset.xml` MAY have one `dcterms:license` element as a child of the
   `dcmiMetadata` element. It MUST NOT have more than one such element. If present, and if it contains an attribute
   `xsi:type="dcterms:URI"`, then the element text MUST be one of the [URIs of approved licenses].

3. **(AIP)** The file `metadata/dataset.xml` MUST contain at least one `dcterms:identifier` element with
   an attribute `xsi:type="id-type:DOI"`. The text of this element MUST be a syntactically valid [DOI] identifier
   which SHOULD be resolvable.

4. Any `dcx-dai:DAI` elements MUST contain a syntactically valid [Digital Author Identifier] (DAI) with a valid check digit.
   This DAI SHOULD refer to an existing author. The DAI MAY be provided as a `info:eu-repo/dai/nl/` URI.

5. Any `gml:postList` elements nested in `gml:Polygon` elements:

   * MUST have an even number of values.
   * MUST have at least three different pairs of values, each of which describes one point.
   * MUST start and end with the same pair of values.

6. If a `gml:MultiSurface` is used, all nested `gml:Polygon` MUST have the same `srsName` attribute.

7. Any `gml:Point`, `gml:lowerCorner` and `gml:upperCorner` elements MUST have at least two values.

8. Any `dc:identifier` or `dcterms:identifier` element with `xsi:type="id-type:ARCHIS-ZAAK-IDENTIFICATIE`
   MUST have a value of 10 or fewer characters.
   
9. Any attribute `scheme` or `href` MUST be a valid URI with scheme http or https


#### 3.2 `metadata/files.xml`
1. If the file `metadata/files.xml` declares the [DANS bag file metadata schema] namespace then it MUST
   adhere to that schema.

2. The document element MUST be `files`.

3. The document element MUST contain zero or more `file` elements, and MUST NOT contain other elements.
   <!-- Skip if XSD is used -->

4. Each `file` element MUST have a `filepath` attribute which contains the bag local path to the payload file described.
   Directories and non-payload files MUST NOT be described by a `file` element.

5. There MUST NOT be more than one `file` element corresponding to a payload file and every payload file MUST be described
   by a `file` element.

6. Each `file` element MUST contain at least one `dcterms:format` element containing the [Media Type]
   of the file described.

7. Each `file` element MAY contain any number of other [DC] or [DCTERMS] elements describing the file. It MUST NOT contain elements
   from other namespaces, unless permitted by the [DANS bag file metadata schema] schema.
   <!-- Skip if XSD is used -->
   
8. Each file element MAY contain either one `dcterms:accessRights` (DEPRECATED) or `files:accessibleToRights` 
   and/or `files:visibleToRights` (RECOMMENDED). The values of these elements are limited to ANONYMOUS, RESTRICTED_REQUEST and NONE. 
   It is recommended to make files visible to all, by setting `files:visibleToRights` to ANONYMOUS.

#### 3.3 `metadata/depositor-info/agreements.xml`

1. **(AIP)** The file `metadata/depositor-info/agreements.xml` MUST adhere to [DANS deposit agreement metadata].

#### 3.4 `metadata/depositor-info/message-from-depositor.txt`

1. The file `metadata/depositor-info/message-from-depositor.txt` MUST be a plain text file using the UTF-8 character encoding. It SHOULD contain any
   remarks that the depositor wants to convey to the data manager who is to curate this deposit.

#### 3.5 `metadata/depositor-info/depositor-agreement`

1. **(AIP)** The file `metadata/depositor-info/depositor-agreement.pdf` or `metadata/depositor-info/depositor-agreement.txt` contains the agreement that exists between DANS and the depositor. 

#### 3.6 `metadata/amd.xml`

1. **(AIP)** The file `metadata/amd.xml` is optional. If it is present it MUST adhere to [DANS administrative metadata].
 
#### 3.7 `metadata/emd.xml`

1. **(AIP)** The file `metadata/emd.xml` is optional. If it is present it MUST adhere to [DANS EASY metadata dataset].

### 4 Bag sequence requirements
1. **(AIP)** The bag MUST be [virtually-valid] in the context of the bag store it is stored in.

2. If `bag-info.txt` contains the element `Is-Version-Of` the UUID in its value MUST be the bag-id of an existing, archived bag.
   This bag SHOULD be the base revision for the dataset that is to be updated by the deposit. **(AIP)** The `EASY-User-Account` of the archived bag MUST be identical to the `EASY-User-Account` in this `bag-info.txt`.

3. The accessibility and visibility of a dataset file MUST NOT be set to more restrictive than in previous, active
   revisions.

   Explanation: the previous revisions are the other bags in the same bag-sequence with a value in their `bag-info.txt`'s  `Created`-element, that is
   earlier than the `Created`-value in the bag under validation. For each file specified in `metadata/files.xml`, the corresponding
   bag-files in the previous revisions MUST NOT have an effective accessibility or effective visibility that are more open than
   the accessibility of that file. The accessibility and visibility for a file are found in the `file` element with a
   `filepath` attribute matching the bag local path of the file, in the `files:accessibleToRights` and `files:visibleToRights` element texts, respectively.
   The possible values, with increasing restrictiveness are: `ANONYMOUS`, `RESTRICTED_REQUEST`, `NONE`.

   If the `files:accessibleToRights` and/or `files:visibleToRights` elements are not specified, the effective value can be derived from the
   `ddm:accessRights` element value in `metadata/dataset.xml`, using the following table:

   `ddm:accessRights`                  | default `files:accessibleToRights`   | default `files:visibleToRights`
   ------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------
   `OPEN_ACCESS`                       | `ANONYMOUS`                          | `ANONYMOUS`
   `REQUEST_PERMISSION`                | `RESTRICTED_REQUEST`                 | `ANONYMOUS`
   `NO_ACCESS`                         | `NONE`                               | `ANONYMOUS`

References
----------
* [AIP] - Archival Information Package
* [bag-store] - storage for immutable, [virtually-valid] bags
* [BagIt] - packaging format on which the DANS Data Vault is based
* [DANS administrative metadata] - shema for administrative metadata
* [DANS bag file metadata schema] - schema for content file specific metadata
* [DANS dataset metadata schema] - schema for dataset level metadata
* [DANS DCTERMS extension: Digital Author Identifier] - extensions to accommodate Digital Author Identifiers
* [DANS DCTERMS extension: Geography Markup Language] -  extensions to accommodate Geography Markup Language  
* [DANS deposit agreement metadata] - schema for metadata about the agreement between DANS and the depositor
* [DC] - Dublin Core metadata elements
* [DCTERMS] - metadata schema from which elements are used in several DANS metadata schemas
* [DOI] - Digital Object Identifier
* [EASY administrative metadata schema] - legacy schema for administrative metadata
* [EASY administrative workflow metadata schema] - legacy helper schema for [EASY administrative metadata schema]
* [EASY metadata schema] - legacy schema for dataset level metadata
* [GML 3.1.1 Simplified Features profile Levels 0 and 1] - Profile of Geography Mark-up Language
* [ISO 8601] - standard for formatting dates and times
* [Media Type] - identifiers for file formats
* [OAIS Reference Model] - reference model for long term preservation archives
* [RFC 2119] - specification for use of requirement level key words
* [SIP] - Submission Information Package
* [URIs of approved licenses] - licenses that may be used for datasets deposited in the DANS archive
* [urn:uuid] - URN scheme for [UUID]s
* [UUID] - universally unique identifiers
* [XML Schema] - constraint language for specifying types of XML documents

[AIP]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Archival_Information_System#The_OAIS_environment_and_information_model
[bag-store]: https://dans-knaw.github.io/easy-bag-store/03_definitions.html
[BagIt]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-kunze-bagit
[DANS administrative metadata]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/bag/metadata/amd/amd.xsd
[DANS bag file metadata schema]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/bag/metadata/files/files.xsd
[DANS dataset metadata schema]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/md/ddm/ddm.xsd
[DANS DCTERMS extension: Digital Author Identifier]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/dcx/dcx-dai.xsd
[DANS DCTERMS extension: Geography Markup Language]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/dcx/dcx-gml.xsd
[DANS deposit agreement metadata]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/bag/metadata/agreements/agreements.xsd
[DANS EASY metadata dataset]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/md/emd/emd.xml
[DC]: http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/
[DCTERMS]: http://www.dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/
[Digital Author Identifier]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_Author_Identifier
[DOI]: https://www.doi.org/
[EASY administrative metadata schema]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/bag/metadata/amd/amd.xsd
[EASY administrative workflow metadata schema]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/bag/metadata/amd/wfs.xsd
[EASY metadata schema]: https://easy.dans.knaw.nl/schemas/md/emd/2017/09/emd.xsd
[GML 3.1.1 Simplified Features profile Levels 0 and 1]: http://schemas.opengis.net/gml/3.1.1/profiles/gmlsfProfile/1.0.0/gmlsf.xsd
[ISO 8601]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601
[Media Type]: https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml
[OAIS Reference Model]: https://public.ccsds.org/pubs/650x0m2.pdf
[RFC 2119]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt
[SIP]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Archival_Information_System#The_OAIS_environment_and_information_model
[URIs of approved licenses]: ./0.0.0-licenses.txt
[urn:uuid]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier
[UUID]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier
[virtually-valid]: https://dans-knaw.github.io/easy-bag-store/03_definitions.html#virtually-valid
[XML Schema]: https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-1/
